ALFAS OCHIENG WERE vs JOSEPH MAINA & ANOTHER [1997] KEHC 52 (KLR)
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in




























Home






Judgments






Superior Courts






High Court






High Court at Nairobi (Milimani Law Courts)












ALFAS OCHIENG WERE vs JOSEPH MAINA & ANOTHER [1997] KEHC 52 (KLR)





























































          Download PDF
          (135.5 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















ALFAS OCHIENG WERE vs JOSEPH MAINA & ANOTHER [1997] KEHC 52 (KLR)





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              























                            Citation
                          



                            ALFAS OCHIENG WERE vs JOSEPH MAINA & ANOTHER [1997] KEHC 52 (KLR)
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Media Neutral Citation
    



      [1997] KEHC 52 (KLR)
      


  
    Copy
  






      Court
    




High Court





      Court station
    




High Court at Nairobi (Milimani Law Courts)





        Case number
      



        
          ? 2450 of 1997
          
        
      



                              
  
    Alternative citations
  

                            





                                  ALFAS OCHIENG WERE vs JOSEPH MAINA & ANOTHER[1997]eKLR
                                  


  
    Copy
  








                            Judgment date
                          



                            19 December 1997
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



                          Type
                        



                          Judgment
                        




























Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        






















































REPUBLIC OF KENYA

	IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA 




AT NAIROBI

	MILIMANI LAW COURTS 




CIVIL CASE NO. 2450 FO 1997




ALFAS OCHIENG WERE .................................................. PLAINTIFF




VERSUS




KENYA BUS SERVICES .......................................... 1ST DEFENDANT




JOSEPH MAINA ...................................................... 2ND DEFENDANT




JUDGMENT



	     The Plaintiff was injured in a road accident on the 21st November, 1993. Liability has been agreed upon. The matter proceeded on assessment of damages.



	    The Plaintiff testified that he became unconscious immediately after the accident and found himself in Kenyatta National Hospital after four days. He stated that he was hospitalised for six months. He was admitted to Kendu Bay Adventist Hospital no two occasions then to St. Brigid’s Home but there has been no improvement. He has no control over urine and it flows freely on its own. He was leftt with his father and mother as the rest of the relatives including his wife have ran away. He has a child of three years conceived before the accident. He stinks and feels like committing suicide. He cannot erect.



	     The Plaintiff’s father testified that he was a retired Assistant Chief. The Plaintiff was admitted to Kenyatta National Hospital for six months. On his discharge he took him home to Karachuonyo. He then took him to Kendu Bay Hospital when the catheter mulfunctioned. He was operated upon but no improvement. The catheter was being inserted every Monday at the cost of Kshs.515/= per trip. The Plaintiff paid a total of Kshs.48,000/=. He took the Plaintiff to St. Brigid’s Hospital in Kisumu but there was no cure. The Plaintiff fractured his waist and has no control over urine. Nobody wants to stay near him. He cannot travel alone. He has attempted suicide on two occasions. His wife ran away. He got another wife for him but this one ran away after three days saying that the Plaintiff was not a man.



	      Dr. Ernest Kioko, a doctor of 26 years standing and who has a Master degree in internal medicine and a kidney specialist testified that he examined the plaintiff. The Plaintiff was hospitalised for two months at Kenyatta National Hospital after he fractured his pelvis which tore the bladder and urethra. Had injuries to parts of the intestine. The Plaintiff looked ill and miserable. He weighed 49 Kgs. On examination the Plaintiff had 8” longitudinal scar bellow the umbilicus and a 4” scar traverse in the pubic area. Urine was noted to ooze from the traverse scar. Other sites noted to have urine leaking were scrotum, undersurface of the penale shaft, right groin and to the right of the anus. Pus was noted to ooze from the same sites. The area to the right of the anus and adjoining part of the right thigh, inner aspect, was swollen. This would explain why opening his bowels was painful.



	      X-ray of the pelvis revealed healed fractures of the right side pelvis and the presence of two stones in the he prostatic portion of the urethra. The urethra had a tight and complete stricture near the urinary bladder. The



	     Consultant concluded that the Plaintiff, aged 31 years by September 1997, sustained major injuries to the pelvis which tore the urethra. Surgical repair was not successful. He has therefore developed urinary leaks as urine tracks in different directions. These tracks have become infected and that is why the urine leakage is accompanied by pus. The Consultant recommends that he be taken back to hospital for major reconstruction of his urinary system. He is likely to stay in hospital for two months or so. The cost of treatment could well be about Kshs. One million.



	      At the request of the Defendant the Plaintiff was also examined by Dr. James Swao, Consultant Physician and Kidney Specialist. He confirmed that the Plaintiff sustained pelvic fractures and urinary bladder injury. He went on to state that attempted repair of the bladder trauma by non-specialist has led to multiple fistulae, kidney damage and hence hypertension. Because of these fistulae he has become a public nuisance and not able to marry. He concluded that he will require admission to a reputable hospital, engage a specialist, do specialized tests, treat infection and then do staged urethra surgery. This is difficult and expensive. The success rate is low. The hospital stay is long - six weeks because operation is done in stages. The total cost will be Kshs 2 million and this is on the lower side.



	    In cross examination he stated that it was not a case of negligence but it was prudent to have a urologist. The operation was carried out by orthopaedic surgeons.



	   The Plaintiff was also examined by Dr. Manfredi Risso Consultant Neurosurgeon, Neuro physician and Psychiatrist who prepared a Report. He did not detect any neurological deficits in the Plaintiff. He concluded that from psychological point of view, the Plaintiff has been considerably damaged by the physical injury he suffered during the accident, and by his complications. He recommended that the money for compensation should be first and foremost invested in a final operation, aimed to restore as much as possible the natural condition of the Plaintiff’s urine ways.



	    The consultants are ad idem on the injuries sustained by the plaintiff. They agree as to the need for a further operation. Dr. Swao was of the opinion that unless the Plaintiff is operated upon by the specialist he has only two to three years to live.



	      Counsel for the defendant, Ole Kantai, has submitted that the Defendant is not liable for the consequences arising out of the operation on the plaintiff. He submits that the evidence is that a urologist should have been in attendance. The operation should not have been carried out by the three orghopaedic surgeons at Kenyatta National Hospital. He concedes that his client is only liable for the damages arising out of the fracture of the pelvis. The Plaintiff became unconscious immediately after the accident. He was rushed to Kenyatta National Hospital where he was operated upon by three orthopaedic surgeons. He had sustained fractures of the pelvis. His urinary bladder and urethra were torn. The Plaintiff did not choose the doctors nor the hospital. Dr. Kioko knew the two of the three doctors. He said they were good orthopaedic surgeons.



	    The Plaintiff had, according to the evidence of his father, come to Nairobi on a visit. He therefore returned home to Karachuonyo after he was discharged from Hospital. The complications then set in as the bladder was not properly repaired. The catheter malfunctioned and the Plaintiff went to Kendu Bay Hospital. Dr. Kioko testified that Kendu Bay Hospital would be able to carry out minor surgical operation relieve the pain and to insert catheter. The Plaintiff then attended two other Nursing Homes but no operation was carried out. Dr. Kioko testified that the inserting of a catheter is a minor operation and is routine. There is no negligence attributed to the three orthopaedic surgeons. Indeed Dr. Swao said so.



	   The case is distinguishable from Civil Appeal No.46 of 1977 JANE WANGUI OBWOGI -VS- LAWRENCE JOHN ABURI where the doctors detected one fracture and missed the other. The Court of Appeal held that negligence on the part of the medical team in failing to notice the fracture dislocation of the left hip during the initial hospitalisation was not something that the respondent could have reasonably foreseen or provided against.



	   The Plaintiff sustained serious injuries. He has been in pain since the date of the accident. He stinks. He cannot sit with other people because of the stench he emits. Dr. Kioko testified that further surgery will not cure him 100%. He will improve at the most by 25 to 30%. He will however remain a permanent patient. Dr. Swao put the success rate at 25 - 50%.



	   The Plaintiff was born in 1967. He was therefore 26 years at the time of the accident. He was in good employment at the time. His future has been rendered bleak by the accident. His sexual life has been affected.



	    I assess general damages for pain, suffering and loss of amenities at Kshs.1,000,000/-.



	    The Plaintiff was employed as a buyer earning a net salary of Khs.11,371/=. PW.3 George Olonde Administrative Manager of Multipurpose Enterprises Ltd. testified that the Plaintiff had good prospects. His salary had just been increased. I adopt a multiplier of 15 and assess damages for loss of future earning at Kshs.11,371 x 12 x 15 = Kshs.2,046,780/=.



	   All the three doctors recommended that the Plaintiff should undergo further surgery. Dr. swao, the defendant’s Consultant, put the cost at Kshs.2,000,000/=. I award the said sum as cost of future surgery. This sum was pleaded under an amendment to the Plaint on the 10th November, 1997.



	     The Plaintiff will require nursing care but I have to bear in mind that after the operation the leakage will stop and the plaintiff will not require nursing care. The evidence adduced is that the father has been looking after the Plaintiff. I make no award under this heading.



	    I will also not award the cost of catheters and medical consultantions for lack of proof.



	   I award Shs.443,907/= as proved special damages. The counsel for the defendant should have objected to the production of the copies at the hearing.



	   I therefore enter judgment for the Plaintiff against the Defendants jointly and severally as follows:-



	(a) General damages for pain, suffering and Loss of amenities -    Kshs.1,000,000/=



	(b) Loss of earning capacity -                                                                    Kshs.2,046,780/=.



	(c) Cost of future surgery -                                                                          Kshs.2,000,000/=.



	(d) Special damages - Kshs. 443,907/=.



	                                                                                                                       - Kshs.5,490,687/=



	       Less 20% contribution                                                                 
     -Kshs.1,098,137/-.



	                                                                                                                   
 -Kshs.4,392,550/=



	                                                                                                                              . =========



	The Plaintiff shall also have the costs of suit and interest.




Delivered this 19th Day of December, 1997.




J.V. JUMA




JUDGE
















▲ To the top



























          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel