Anna Ngina Mbuvi v Republic [2017] KEHC 1314 (KLR)
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in




























Home






Judgments






Superior Courts






High Court






High Court at Murang'a












Anna Ngina Mbuvi v Republic [2017] KEHC 1314 (KLR)





























































          Download PDF
          (48.3 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















Anna Ngina Mbuvi v Republic [2017] KEHC 1314 (KLR)





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              























                            Citation
                          



                            Anna Ngina Mbuvi v Republic [2017] KEHC 1314 (KLR)
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Media Neutral Citation
    



      [2017] KEHC 1314 (KLR)
      


  
    Copy
  






      Court
    




High Court





      Court station
    




High Court at Murang'a





        Case number
      



        
          Criminal Appeal 83 of 2016
          
        
      



                              
  
    Alternative citations
  

                            





                                  Anna Ngina Mbuvi v Republic [2017] eKLR
                                  


  
    Copy
  








                            Judges
                          



                            
                              
                              DW Mbuteti
                              
                            
                          



                            Judgment date
                          



                            29 December 2017
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



                          Type
                        



                          Judgment
                        



                              Original source file
                            




Download DOCX

                              (23.1 KB)
                            











        Case action
      



        Judgment
      



        Court division
      



        Criminal
      




















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        






















































REPUBLIC OF KENYA




IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA AT MURANG’A




CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 83 OF 2016




 
(From original sentence in Murang’a CM Criminal Case No 747 of 2015 – J J Masiga, RM)




ANNA NGINA MBUVI ………...…………………..………..APPELLANT




VERSUS




REPUBLIC………………….……………….................RESPONDENT




J U D G M E N T




1.
 The Appellant, 
Anna Ngina Mbuvi
, was convicted upon her own plea of 
being in possession of narcotic drugs
 contrary to 
section 3(1)
 and 
(2)(a) 
of the 
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Act, No 4 of 1994
.
  It was alleged in the charge that on 03/07/2015 at Ngatho Village in Gatanga District within Murang’a County, she was found in possession of 246 grammes of 
cannabis sativa
 (bhang) valued at KShs 2,780/00 which was not in the form of a medical preparation.  She was sentenced to serve four (4) years imprisonment.




2.
 The Appellant has appealed against sentence only, upon the ground that the same was harsh and excessive in her particular circumstances.  Those circumstances are that she was a first offender who pleaded guilty and was remorseful; that she is a widow who was raising four school going children;  that she has medical conditions that require constant attention; and that she is now committed to leading an upright life and bring up her children properly.




3
. I have perused the record of the trial court. The facts given to court by the prosecution disclose a flagrant breach of the Appellant’s constitutional right to privacy under 
Article 31
 of the 
Constitution of Kenya
, 
2010
. 
  That right includes the right not to have her person, home or property searched.




4.
 The facts given were that on 03/07/2015 at about 13.00 hours police officers were on patrol within Gathu Village in Gatanga when they were tipped off that the Appellant was a 
notorious 
cannabis peddler. The police then raided her house and conducted a search therein and purportedly recovered the cannabis possession of which the Appellant was charged with.




5.
 The prosecution never explained why the police did not first obtain a search warrant from a magistrate’s court to enter and search the Appellant’s house.  Impromptu entry and searches of people’s houses and homes by the police (without necessary warrants duly issued by a court of law) in this day and age is not acceptable at all.  It is an invasion of people’s privacy that should not be tolerated.  Had the Appellant appealed against the conviction I would not have had any difficulty in allowing the appeal upon the ground that the search that recovered the drugs was illegal and a grave violation of the Appellant’s constitutional right to privacy.  But she has not so appealed.




6.
 As for her appeal against the sentence, I will partially allow the same.  A sentence of four (4) years imprisonment for a first offender who pleaded guilty and was remorseful, and a widowed mother who was raising four children, was manifestly harsh and excessive.




7
. I will set aside the sentence of four (4) years imprisonment imposed and substitute therefor a sentence of two (2) years and five (5) months imprisonment, effective from the date of sentencing by the trial court, 07/07/2015.  That will mean that the Appellant will have already served that sentence, and will enable her to be set at liberty forthwith unless otherwise lawfully held.  To that limited extent only is the appeal against sentence allowed.  It is so ordered.




DATED AND SIGNED AT MURANG’A THIS 27
TH
 DAY OF DECEMBER 2017




H P G WAWERU




JUDGE




DELIVERED AT MURANG’A THIS 29
TH
  DAY OF DECEMBER 2017
















▲ To the top



























          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel