Dominic Mwalugha v Republic [1993] KEHC 130 (KLR)
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in




























Home






Judgments






Superior Courts






High Court






High Court at Mombasa












Dominic Mwalugha v Republic [1993] KEHC 130 (KLR)




Reported































































          Download PDF
          (129.6 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















Dominic Mwalugha v Republic [1993] KEHC 130 (KLR)





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              























                            Citation
                          



                            Dominic Mwalugha v Republic [1993] KEHC 130 (KLR)
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Media Neutral Citation
    



      [1993] KEHC 130 (KLR)
      


  
    Copy
  






      Court
    




High Court





      Court station
    




High Court at Mombasa





        Case number
      



        
          Criminal Appeal 189 of 1993
          
        
      



                              
  
    Alternative citations
  

                            





                                  Dominic Mwalugha v Republic [2013] eKLR
                                  


  
    Copy
  








                            Judgment date
                          



                            23 December 1993
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



                          Type
                        



                          Judgment
                        



                              Original source file
                            




Download DOCX

                              (16.8 KB)
                            











        Case action
      



        Ruling
      



        Filing county
      



        Mombasa
      




















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        






















































REPUBLIC OF KENYA




IN THE HIGH COURT AT MOMBASA 




CRIMINAL APPLICATION NO 189 OF 1993




DOMINIC MWALUGHA ….………..... APPLICANT




VERSUS




REPUBLIC……………………….…RESPONDENT



	 




RULING



	The applicant Dominic Mwalugha was charged with the offence of being in possession of cocaine contrary to rule 9 of the Dangerous Drugs Act 245 Laws of Kenya.



	The record shows that the charge was read over and explained to the applicant in English which he said he understood whereupon he said “it is true”. The facts were then stated by the court prosecutor and when the Court asked the applicant if the facts as read were correct he replied “The facts are correct”. He was then convicted and after mitigation was sentenced to serve 18 months’ imprisonment. In effect the applicant was convicted on his own plea of guilty.



	The applicant has since filed an appeal (HC CRA No 503 of 1993) against both the said conviction and sentence and the Petition of Appeal is part of the record in the present application. This is an application for bail pending the hearing of the said appeal.



	The basic issues raised in the said Petition of Appeal are that the plea of guilty as recorded by the learned trial magistrate was not unequivocal, that it was not established the applicant clearly understood the offence preferred against him, that the answer to the charge did not establish his guilt and finally that the sentence was harsh and excessive.



	For the applicant to succeed in obtaining the order sought it must be shown that his appeal has overwhelming chances of being successful. That is the basic test (See – 
Somo –vs- Republic 
[1972] EA 476). From what I am able to discern from the record before me I have no doubt that the charge was read over and explained to the applicant by the Court in English which he said he understood. What is in doubt is whether he was asked to admit or deny each and every element of the same (emphasis mine).



	The applicant was unrepresented. Rule 9 under which the applicant was charged falls under subsidiary legislation – not the Parent Act. The marginal note thereof read “condition of possession”. The said rule does not create an offence or provide penalty. It would appear therefore that the charge was misplaced.



	However, assuming that a proper charge was before the Court the prosecution had the duty, even in a plea of guilty, to prove that the applicant was guilty beyond any reasonable doubt. With profound respect, this appears not to have been the case. The subject matter alleged to have been cocaine found in the possession of the applicant was not proved as such. No government analyst’s report was produced to the Court and put to the applicant.



	The foregoing show that the applicant,s appeal has overwhelming chances of being successful. He should therefore not be denied his freedom at this stage. His application for bail pending the hearing of his appeal succeeds.



	I order that he may be released in executing a bond of Kshs 10,000/- with one surety in the like sum. He must attend the hearing of the appeal.



	Orders accordingly.



	Dated and delivered at Mombasa this 23
rd
 day of December, 1993



	 




A.MBOGHOLI - MSAGHA 



	……………………..




JUDGE



	 
















▲ To the top



























          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel