George Obewa v Republic [1987] KECA 40 (KLR)
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in




























Home






Judgments






Superior Courts






Court of Appeal






Court of Appeal at Kisumu












George Obewa v Republic [1987] KECA 40 (KLR)





























































          Download PDF
          (129.4 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















George Obewa v Republic [1987] KECA 40 (KLR)





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              























                            Citation
                          



                            George Obewa v Republic [1987] KECA 40 (KLR)
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Media Neutral Citation
    



      [1987] KECA 40 (KLR)
      


  
    Copy
  






      Court
    




Court of Appeal





      Court station
    




Court of Appeal at Kisumu





        Case number
      



        
          Criminal Appeal 24 of 1987
          
        
      



                              
  
    Alternative citations
  

                            





                                  George Obewa v Republic [1987] eKLR
                                  


  
    Copy
  








                            Judges
                          



                            
                              
                              HG Platt,
                              
                            
                              
                              JM Gachuhi,
                              
                            
                              
                              FK Apaloo
                              
                            
                          



                            Judgment date
                          



                            23 December 1987
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



                          Type
                        



                          Judgment
                        











        Case action
      



        Judgment
      



        Court division
      



        Criminal
      



        Filing county
      



        Kisumu
      




















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        






















































IN THE COURT OF APPEAL 




AT KISUMU




 (CORAM: PLATT, GACHUHI, & APALOO, JJ.A.) 




CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 24 OF 1987




BETWEEN 




GEORGE OBEWA ………............…APPELLANT




 AND




 REPUBLIC ….………….........…..RESPONDENT 



	(Appeal from a Judgment of the High Court of Kenya at Kisumu,



	(Mr. Justice Porter) dated 29th September, 1985



	in



	Criminal Appeal No. 107 of 1985)




JUDGMENT OF THE COURT



	The appellant appeals against the judgment of the High Court which on September 27, 1985, affirmed his conviction and one other person of robbery with violence contrary to section 296(1) of the Penal Code.



	The facts are fairly straightforward. The appellant and his confederate were both Administrative Police Officers. On January 6, 1985, they were admittedly involved in an accident along the Otieno Oyoo Street in Kisumu. The prosecution claimed that they had robbed one John Bwana Opundo of cash Kshs 6000.



	According to the prosecution, the complainant arrived from Bondo with a view to do some shopping in Kisumu. He has a shop there. While he was walking along the street at sometime between 10.00 and 11.00 am, he met someone who got hold of his shirt and a 20 shilling note were torn. A third person who was obviously with the gang, held a pistol which was pointed at him.



	As was to be expected, Opundo raised an alarm and shouted for help. Some public-spirited persons came to his aid but the person who snatched the money escaped. The two other robbers were arrested. One of these two also succeeded in making his escape. So only one was taken to the police station. About an hour and half or so later, the appellant also called at the police station. And reported that he and another A P had arrested his companion but that he succeeded in escaping. He had come to report the matter to the police, apparently to obtain their assistance to free his companion. As the police were already 
aut fait
 with the facts, he was also immediately apprehended. Both were accordingly brought before the court.



	The present appellant was identified as the person who carried the pistol and the second robber who escaped. The appellant’s story was that although he was at the scene, they in fact arrested a person in unlawful possession of gold. They had a tip off from a small boy about this. While, they were taking the person to the police station, he ran away and brought a number of people who fought with them. The appellant said, as he was getting the worse of the fight, he himself escaped and sometime later reported this matter to the police only to be apprehended as one of the robbers.



	So, the only question before the learned magistrate was, which of these two contradictory stories was true. He held that the prosecution’s version of the matter was the side of truth and that the appellant and his confederates indeed robbed the complainant of his money. Both appealed against their convictions and sentences to the High Court. The learned judge having independently considered the matter, also reached the same conclusion as the trial magistrate. So on this matter, they were two concurrent findings of fact.



	The appellant brought this second appeal to the court and argued that on the facts he was wrongly convicted.



	There is no question of identification. The appellant admitted that he took part in the fracas and escaped to gobtained police assistance. So which of the two versions of the facts is correct, is a matter peculiarly within the province of the trial magistrate. In a fully considered and well – reasoned judgment, he accepted the prosecution version as true, it was not suggested that he misdirected himself or misapprehended any point of law.



	The learned judge of the High Court also applied his mind de novo to the facts and the law and came to exactly the same conclusion. Nothing said by the appellant satisfied us that these two concurrent findings were wrong. On the contrary, we think they are fully justified by the evidence.



	We think therefore that there is no merit in this appeal. It ought to be and is accordingly dismissed.



	Dated and delivered at Kisumu this 23rd day of December, 1987.




H. G. PLATT 




...........................




JUDGE OF APPEAL 



	 




J. M. GACHUHI 




.................................




JUDGE OF APPEAL 



	 




F. K. APALOO




...............................




JUDGE OF APPEAL



	 



	I certify that this is a



	true copy of the original.




DEPUTY REGISTRAR
















▲ To the top



























          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel