Julius Ngure Ngare v Michael Njagi Kathianyu [2019] KEELC 224 (KLR)
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in




























Home






Judgments






Superior Courts






Environment and Land Court






Environment and Land Court at Chuka












Julius Ngure Ngare v Michael Njagi Kathianyu [2019] KEELC 224 (KLR)





























































          Download PDF
          (124.8 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















Julius Ngure Ngare v Michael Njagi Kathianyu [2019] KEELC 224 (KLR)





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              























                            Citation
                          



                            Julius Ngure Ngare v Michael Njagi Kathianyu [2019] KEELC 224 (KLR)
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Media Neutral Citation
    



      [2019] KEELC 224 (KLR)
      


  
    Copy
  






      Court
    




Environment and Land Court





      Court station
    




Environment and Land Court at Chuka





        Case number
      



        
          Environment & Land Case 247 of 2015
          
        
      



                              
  
    Alternative citations
  

                            





                                  Julius Ngure Ngare v Michael Njagi Kathianyu [2019] eKLR
                                  


  
    Copy
  








                            Judgment date
                          



                            31 December 2019
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



                          Type
                        



                          Judgment
                        



                              Original source file
                            




Download DOCX

                              (20.4 KB)
                            











        Case action
      



        Ruling
      



        Court division
      



        Environment and Land
      




















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        






















































REPUBLIC OF KENYA




IN THE ENVIRONMENT AND LAND COURT  AT CHUKA




EMBU




 ELC  CASE NO. 247  OF 2015




JULIUS NGURE NGARE ...................................PLAINTIFF/RESPONDENT




VERSUS




MICHAEL NJAGI KATHIANYU .............................DEFENDANT/APPLICANT




RULING




1.  This application is dated 
20
th
 December, 2019
 and seeks the following orders:




1.  That this matter be certified urgent and service be dispensed with in the 1
st
 instance.




2.  That this honourable court do grant an order directing the defendant/applicant be allowed to deposit Kshs.10,000/= beginning this coming January and continue depositing an equal amount in court by or before the end of subsequent months for 12 months till the taxed amount totaling approximately Kshs.120,000/= is cleared, plus the requisite court collecting fees and less what I had paid them earlier.




3.  That this honourable court do grant orders restraining M/s A.P. Kariithi and Company Advocates, their servants, agents and/or any other 3
rd
 parties acting under their direction from auctioning, selling or dealing with any of the applicant’s properties or even harassing or threatening or putting in Civil jail the defendant/applicant herein.




4.  That the defendant/applicant be allowed adequate time to dispose any of his belongings to offset the amount in question as he continues to pay in court the suggested installment amount.




5.  That costs be in the cause.




2.  The application is supported by the affidavit of Michael Njagi Kathianyu sworn on 
20
th
 December, 2019
 and has the following grounds:-




a)  That the bill of costs in his advocates application was taxed at Kshs.120,000/= although the applicant herein had vehemently opposed this for the instruction fee was not what had originally been agreed upon between the advocate and his client, the applicant in this matter.




b)  That M/s A.P. Kariithi and Company Advocates have given their client who is the applicant herein a short notice which is soon expiring then they will do execution.




c)  That the applicant is deeply aware that the advocates are targeting the same land he struggled for and obtained through this suit and at exorbitant cost with help from friends, family and other well-wishers.




d)  That the applicant has premonition that the advocates would auction the applicant’s property at throw away prices and not at their market value at which he, applicant, would sell given the adequate time and orders sought, since even less than an eighth (1/8) of an acre would settle the whole bill as taxed. The land portions are worth over Kshs.10,000,000/= jointly and any of its subdivisions is worth more than Kshs.2m, a figure much higher than what is demanded.




e)  That no prejudice will be caused if the orders herein are allowed.




f)  That it is in the spirit of fairness and justice that this honourable court allows this application and grants the orders sought.




3.  The applicant did not come to court when the application was slated for exparte hearing.




4.  The following orders are issued:-




1.  The application is 
NOT
 certified urgent but will be heard on priority basis.




2.  The applicant is directed to serve the application upon the plaintiff/respondent within 14 days of today.




3.  It is directed that the application be heard interpartes before Hon. Justice Angima, the ELC Judge at 
Embu, on 29
th
 January, 2020




4.  Costs shall be in the cause.




Delivered in open Court at Chuka this 31
st
 day of December, 2019 in the presence of:




CA: Ndegwa




P. M. NJOROGE,




JUDGE.
















▲ To the top



























          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel