Macharia v Wanyoike [1971] KEHC 1 (KLR)
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in




























Home






Judgments






Superior Courts






High Court






High Court at Nairobi (Milimani Commercial Courts)












Macharia v Wanyoike [1971] KEHC 1 (KLR)




Reported































































          Download PDF
          (136.7 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















Macharia v Wanyoike [1971] KEHC 1 (KLR)





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              









                  Citations
                  
- / 1

























                            Citation
                          



                            Macharia v Wanyoike [1971] KEHC 1 (KLR)
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Media Neutral Citation
    



      [1971] KEHC 1 (KLR)
      


  
    Copy
  






      Court
    




High Court





      Court station
    




High Court at Nairobi (Milimani Commercial Courts)





        Case number
      



        
          Civil Suit 128 of 1971
          
        
      



                              
  
    Alternative citations
  

                            





                                  Macharia v Wanyoike [1971] eKLR
                                  


  
    Copy
  








                            Judgment date
                          



                            28 December 1971
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



                          Type
                        



                          Judgment
                        











        Case action
      



        Judgment
      



        Court division
      



        Civil
      



        Filing county
      



        Nairobi
      




















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        






















































REPUBLIC OF KENYA




IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA AT NAIROBI




CIVIL SUIT NO. 128 OF 1971




MACHARIA.................................................................................PLAINTIFF




VERSUS




WANYOIKE........................................................................RESPONDENT



	 




JUDGMENT



	This is an application by way of motion under Order VI, rules 17 and 29 of the Civil Procedure (Revised) Rules, seeking the striking out of the pleading on behalf of three of eight defendants and the entering of judgment against them in accordance with the provisions of the latter rule. On January 27, 1971 the plaintiff-applicant filed a plaint in which he claimed the sum of Kshs 71,944.95 from eight defendants as joint contractors in an agreement with him under which agreement he advanced various sums of money to their joint and several use and/or benefit. He alleged that the defendants, contrary to the agreement, failed or refused to sell to him a parcel of land in discharge of a substantial portion of the amount of money he now claims and that they have also failed or refused to refund the Kshs 71,944.95 the total amount of monies he advanced to them. Counsel for the respondent in the instant application and who informed the Court that he is representing defendants Nos 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 in the suit, filed a defence to the plaint on the March 11, 1971. Later, ie on September 8, 1971 he filed the document to which objection is now being taken. The nature of the document being of much importance, I reproduce its most relevant portion, viz



	“Take notice that the defendants Nos 2, 4 and 6 served herein with the plaint on the 13th day of August, 1971, and who have appeared in this action on the 23rd day of August, 1971 hereby adopt the defence dated March 11, 1971 and filed by Messrs Khanna & Company also in the action, and further pleads as follows



	8. The defendants will rely upon Section 3(2) of the Law of Contract Act (Cap 23)”



	It was conceded, and rightly so, that this document is intended to be a pleading ie “a defence by reference”, and indeed it would have been difficult to contend to the contrary by virtue of the phrases “adopt the defence dated March 11, 1971” and “and further plead” contained therein.



	The rules under which the application is brought provide as follows:



	17. The court may at any stage of the proceedings order to be struck out or amended any matter in any endorsement or pleading which may be unnecessary or scandalous or which may tend to prejudice, embarrass, or delay the fair trial of the action ...



	29. The court may upon application, order any pleading to be struck out on the ground that it discloses no reasonable cause of action or answer and, in any such case, or in case of the suit or defence being shown by the pleadings to be frivolous or vexatious, may order the suit to be stayed or dismissed or judgment to be entered accordingly as may be just.



	Counsel for the respondents contended that the filed defence by reference constitutes no irregularity and submitted in the main that it should be shown on behalf of the plaintiff that some ingredient of the above mentioned rules on which the plaintiff relies has been disregarded; and with regard to rule 17 the motion was incompetent in that it does not set out the particular portion of the pleading objected to by the plaintiff; and that with respect to the filed defence of March 11, 1971 to which the present “defence” points, it cannot be said that it is, or contains matters, frivolous or vexatious. He further contended that there is no rule which prohibits the defendants putting in a common defence, or compelling them to repeat the seven paragraphs of the defence of the March 11, 1971. If I may say so, with respect to the main submission, counsel for the respondents appears to have misunderstood the true nature of the objection, or is assuming that the filed defence of the March 11, 1971 is already or effectively before the court as an approved pleading to the benefit of the respondents. As I see it the plaintiff is complaining against the nature and purport of the present “pleading by reference”, the potential tow-line being cast from the tug to ship or wharf. It is the document of September 8, 1971 
per se 
against which objection is being made and with which the court is particularly concerned, and in this behalf I think it is correct to address my mind to the all embracing provisions of the relevant portion of the cardinal rule 1 of Order VI, ie



	Subject to the provisions of rules 27 and 28 of this order, every pleading shall contain, and contain only, a statement in a concise form of the material facts on which the party pleading relies for claim or defence as the case may be.



	It appears to me that the mandatory terms of this portion of the rule in relation to the contents of “every pleading” are the correct media by which the questioned pleading should be assessed. It also appears to me, with respect, that the contention that there is no rule compelling the party pleading to repeat paragraphs of a pleading he intends to adopt must also fail as a matter of interpretation of the portion of rule 1 above. I am firmly of the view that the stating of facts is the primary dictate of the rule and since it is also permitted to raise points of law in a pleading, the proviso relating to rules 27 and 28 was incorporated in verbiage of the cardinal rule itself and not elsewhere, so as to eliminate instances of doubt, on the principle, 
Expressio unius personae vel rei, est exclusio alterius
.
 That a pleading by way of the proposed short-cut method may or may not be an out of place is perhaps a worthwhile proposition for the rules making body on grounds of expedience or as a timesaving device; but experience has repeatedly shown that shortcuts invariably result in being more expensive and time-absorbing in the end. It may be specifically urged that in relation to the precaution against delay envisaged by rule 17, a short-cut accepted or applied to expedite but not delay; but a short-cut in breach of a fundamental rule creating or occasioning remedial action as in the circumstances under consideration cannot escape the stigma of  ‘delay’.



	The court must construe the rules as they happen to be and I fail to see or agree that the proposed defence of the respondents as pleaded, is in accordance with the existing rule 1, and find that in the circumstances it manifests a tendency if not an already accomplished reality likely to delay the fair trial of the action. The proposed pleading is accordingly struck out. The court, however, considers that its discretion will not be justly exercised to enter judgment against the respondents as prayed, having regard to all the circumstances.



	The motion succeeds in part mentioned with the costs of the application to the plaintiff.



	1. Leave to appeal granted



	2. Leave to file new defence within 14 days and to reply within 10 days thereafter




Dated and Delivered at Nairobi this 28th day of December 1971.




C.H.E.MILLER




JUDGE
















▲ To the top



















        Cited documents 
0









        Documents citing this one 
1





    Judgment 
1




















1.




Owner of Motor Vessel “Mirembe Judith” v Jade International Shipping Line DMC (Civil Appeal E124 of 2022) [2023] KECA 452 (KLR) (14 April 2023) (Judgment)


Explained













































          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel