Moni Makau v Republic [1983] KEHC 43 (KLR)
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in




























Home






Judgments






Superior Courts






High Court






High Court at Nairobi (Milimani Law Courts)












Moni Makau v Republic [1983] KEHC 43 (KLR)





























































          Download PDF
          (35.7 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















Moni Makau v Republic [1983] KEHC 43 (KLR)





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              























                            Citation
                          



                            Moni Makau v Republic [1983] KEHC 43 (KLR)
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Media Neutral Citation
    



      [1983] KEHC 43 (KLR)
      


  
    Copy
  






      Court
    




High Court





      Court station
    




High Court at Nairobi (Milimani Law Courts)





        Case number
      



        
          Criminal Appeal 362 of 1983
          
        
      



        Attorneys
      







                              
  
    Alternative citations
  

                            





                                  Moni Makau v Republic [1983] eKLR
                                  


  
    Copy
  








                            Judgment date
                          



                            22 December 1983
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



                          Type
                        



                          Judgment
                        











        Case action
      



        Judgment
      



        Court division
      



        Criminal
      



        Filing county
      



        Nairobi
      




















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        






















































REPUBLIC OF KENYA




IN THE HIGH COURT OF KENYA




AT NAIROBI (MILIMANI LAW COURTS)




CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 362 OF 1983




(From Original Conviction(s) and sentence(s) in Criminal Case No 296 of 1982 of the Resident Magistrate’s Court at Kitui J K Mbugua Esq)




MONI MAKAU ……………………………. APPELLANT




VERSUS




REPUBLIC ……………………………… RESPONDENT




CORAM: TODD, J




Appellant absent, unrepresented and not wishing to be present
 
C W Gatonye (Senior State Counsel) for Respondent




JUDGMENT



	The appellant Moni Makau alias Joseph Makau Kienza was convicted after trial of robbery contrary to Section 296(1) of the Penal Code (cap 63) together with one Makau Mulei the appellant’s co-accused when the appellant was sentenced to 2 years’ imprisonment and 5 strokes of the cane and he was also ordered to be subject to police supervision for 5 years on his release from prison while his co-accused, an old man of about 65 years old and who was a first offender and of good family and recommended by the probation officer, was put on probation for 2 years. The appellant now appeals to this court. The appellant was also charged with being cruel to animals contrary to Section 3(1)(a) of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, but he was acquitted of this offence since the learned trial magistrate found the appellant had been charged under the wrong section.



	As regards the robbery charge the complainant’s cattle had apparently strayed into the appellant’s land and caused damage for which the appellant impounded them and refused to release them to the complainant’s wife, demanding compensation from the complainant.



	The matter was reported to the police when the complainant came from Nairobi and upon the police approaching the appellant he ran away. This is not admitted by the appellant. Later in the evening, according to the complainant and one Mwangangi Mutemi (PW 6), the appellant and his father Makau Mulei ambushed the complainant who was walking home with Mwangangi and several others including one of the brothers of the appellant when the appellant fired 4 arrows at the complainant, the last one hitting him in the right upper leg causing him to fall down, after which Makau Mulei went and removed from the complainant’s shirt pocket Kshs 850 in cash and a hand bag containing 2 shirts, 2 underwear, 2 pairs of socks and when the appellant and Makau Mulei ran away together they took the money, the handbag and contents away with them.



	The appellant denied the offence charged and he called his brother Jonathan Nakuthu Makau who is also called Kachevi who said that on the day in question, September 18, 1982 he saw the complainant they entered the same vehicle with another person. The 3 of them alighted from this vehicle and it was dark. While they were going he heard the complainant scream saying he had been shot. He was with the complainant and Mutinda Mutuota. He did not recognize the person who had shot the complainant. He knows Mwangangi Mutemi (PW 60) but he was not there, but he works for the complainant. He reported to the appellant at about 9.15 pm that night.



	Upon a consideration of the evidence the trial magistrate believed the prosecution witnesses but not the evidence of the appellant or his witness or indeed the statutory statement of Makau Mulei and convicted the appellant of the offence robbery as charged. Making my own assessment of the recorded word I have no doubt that the appellant was properly and rightly convicted of the offence of robbery as charged and so his appeal against conviction is dismissed.



	As regards sentence I think the appellant was leniently dealt with in view of the fact that he shot at the complainant with arrows until he hit him and then with Makau Mulai removed from the complainant the Kshs 850 from his pocket and took away his handbag and contents. However as was said in the case of R v Mohamed Ali Jamal [1948] 15 EACE 126:



	“An appellate court should not interfere with the discretion exercised by a trial judge or a magistrate to sentence except in such cases, where it appears that in assessing sentence the judge has acted or has imposed a sentence which is either patently inadequate or manifestly excessive.”



	The appellant’s appeal against sentence is also dismissed.




Dated and delivered at Nairobi this 22nd day of December, 1983.




J H S TODD




JUDGE
















▲ To the top



























          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel