African Re-insurance Corporation (Mandatory Re-insurance Cessions) Act
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in


























African Re-insurance Corporation (Mandatory Re-insurance Cessions) Act


Cap. 487B










































 This is the latest version of this Act.
      























          Download PDF
          (198.8 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















African Re-insurance Corporation (Mandatory Re-insurance Cessions) Act





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              









                  History
                









                  Related documents
                  
1











                  Citations
                  
1 / -

























                            Citation
                          



                            Cap. 487B
                            


  
    Copy
  






                            Date
                          







                                31 December 2022
                              






31 December 2022






13 May 1994











                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



      Original enactment
    




Download original enactment (PDF)

      (8.9 MB)
    











                          Related documents
                        





                                    
                                    Is amended by
                                    
24th Annual Supplement






















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        




























































LAWS OF KENYA




AFRICAN RE-INSURANCE CORPORATION (MANDATORY RE-INSURANCE CESSIONS) ACT


CAP. 487B





      
        
          
            Published in Kenya Gazette Vol. XCVI—No. 22 on 13 May 1994
          
        
      
    



            Assented to on 8 May 1994
          



          Commenced on 1 January 1978
          
        







    
      
      
        
          [Revised by 
24th Annual Supplement (Legal Notice 221 of 2023)
 on 
31 December 2022
]
        
      
    
  






An Act of Parliament to provide for mandatory re-insurance cessions to the African Re-insurance Corporation and for matters related or incidental thereto
WHEREAS by the Agreement establishing the African Re-insurance Corporation (in this Act referred to as the "Corporation") which came into force on 1st June, 1976, the Government of Kenya undertakes to guarantee that all insurance and re-insurance establishments registered or authorized to carry on insurance business in Kenya shall offer to place With the Corporation a minimum of five per cent of each of their re-insurance treaties, both present and future including life treaties undertaken on terms accorded to most favoured re-insurers, and also to ensure that national, local and foreign establishments engaged in direct insurance activities in Kenya conclude separate re-insurance treaties for the local risks;
WHEREAS under the said Agreement the Corporation may accept or decline all or part of the business offered to be placed with it;
AND WHEREAS it is expedient to make provisions giving legal effect to articles 27 and 28 of the said Agreement;
NOW. THEREFORE, BE IT ENACTED by the Parliament of Kenya as follows:-
1. Short title
This Act may be cited as the African Re-insurance Corporation (Mandatory Re-insurance Cessions) Act.
2. Interpretation
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Agreement" means the Agreement establishing the African Re-insurance Corporation;
"Corporation" means the African Re-insurance Corporation established by the Agreement;
"Commissioner of Insurance" means the Commissioner of Insurance appointed under section 3 of the Insurance Act (
Cap. 487
);
"insurance business" has the meaning assigned to it in section 2 of the Insurance Act;
"insurance and re-insurance institution" means any insurance and re-insurance institution registered or authorized to carry on insurance business in Kenya.
3. Mandatory re-insurance cessions to the Corporation
(1)
Any insurance or re-insurance institution shall, on or after the commencement of this Act, offer to place with the Corporation a minimum of five per cent of each of their re-insurance cessions both present and future, including life treaties undertaken on terms accorded to most favoured re-insurers.
(2)
The minimum re-insurance cessions prescribed by subsection (1) of this section are independent of any mandatory cessions prescribed under section 145 of the Insurance Act (
Cap. 487
).
(3)
Subject to any amendment to article 27 of the Agreement in respect of the minimum re-insurance cessions, the Cabinet Secretary for the time being responsible for Insurance may by Order published in the 
Gazette
 vary the minimum re-insurance cessions specified in subsection (1) of this section.
4. Re-insurance arrangements for local risks
(1)
Where local insurance business is covered by global re-insurance treaties established outside Africa every national, foreign or local establishment engaged in direct insurance activities in Kenya shall, on or after the commencement of this Act, conclude separate re-insurance treaties for the local risks.
(2)
Nothing in subsection (1) shall prevent any insurance institution from entering into a direct re-insurance treaty with the Corporation in respect of the whole or part of the risks undertaken by such institution or from making such other arrangements as are mutually acceptable to the Corporation and such institution.
5. Right to accept or decline business offered
(1)
The Corporation may accept or decline all or part of the re-insurance cessions offered to be placed with it under this Act; and in that case the Corporation shall furnish the insurance or re-insurance institution concerned, as the case may be, if so required, with the reasons for its refusal.
(2)
Where re-insurance cessions are refused under subsection (1) of this section any liability of the insurance or re-insurance institution shall cease.
6. Commissioner of Insurance to administer Act
(1)
The Commissioner of Insurance shall administer this Act.
(2)
The Commissioner may in the discharge of his functions under subsection (1) of this section issue such directions as he deems necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
7. Offences and penalties
(1)
Any person who fails—
(a)
to comply with 
section 3
; or
(b)
to comply with any directions issued by the Commissioner of Insurance under 
section 6
,
shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding fifty thousand shillings, and if the offence continues, to a further fine of two thousand shillings for every day during which the offence continues.
(2)
Where a person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) of this section is a natural person that person shall be liable in addition to, or in lieu of, a fine, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years.
(3)
Where a person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) of this section is a body corporate, then notwithstanding the imposition of any penalty under this section, the commission of that offence shall constitute sufficient grounds whereby the Commissioner may apply to the court for winding-up of that body corporate, if such body is incorporated in Kenya.
















▲ To the top













  History of this document












            31 December 2022
            
              
this version









              
                Revised by
                
24th Annual Supplement

















            13 May 1994
            
            
          








Published in Kenya Gazette 22




Read this version















            08 May 1994
            
            
          







              
                Assented to
                
              
              
            















            01 January 1978
            
            
          







              
                Commenced
                
              
              
            





















  Related documents







Is amended by






24th Annual Supplement



























        Cited documents 
1





    Act 
1




















1.




Insurance Act





      
        308 citations
      
    













        Documents citing this one 
0



































          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel