The Kenya Ports Authority (Vesting) Order, 2023
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in


























The Kenya Ports Authority (Vesting) Order, 2023


Legal Notice 39 of 2023





























































          Download PDF
          (285.7 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















The Kenya Ports Authority (Vesting) Order, 2023





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              









                  History
                























                            Citation
                          



                            Legal Notice 39 of 2023
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Primary work
    




Cabinet Secretary to the Treasury (Incorporation) Act





                            Date
                          



                            28 April 2023
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



      Type
    



      Legal Notice
    



      Original enactment
    




Download original enactment (PDF)

      (61.8 KB)
    




















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        




























































LAWS OF KENYA




CABINET SECRETARY TO THE TREASURY (INCORPORATION) ACT


THE KENYA PORTS AUTHORITY (VESTING) ORDER, 2023


LEGAL NOTICE 39 OF 2023





      
        
          
            Published in Kenya Gazette Vol. CXXV—No. 99 on 28 April 2023
          
        
      
    



          Commenced on 31 March 2023
          
        






1. Citation
This Order may be cited as the Kenya Ports Authority  (Vesting) Order, 2023.
2. Interpretation
In this Order, unless the context otherwise requires —
"commencement date"
 means the 16th June, 2021;
"entity"
 includes a natural person, company, association or other body of persons whether incorporated or unincorporated;
"liability"
 means a liability, court case, debt, charge, duty or obligation arising from past or existing project contracts or consultancies of every description and whether present or future, actual or contingent, and whether payable or to be observed or performed in Kenya or elsewhere;
"right"
 means any right or power, whether actual, contingent or prospective; and
"commencement date"
 and 
"vesting date"
 means the 16th June, 2021.
3. Transfer and vesting
The functions and rights vested in the Kenya Ferry Services Limited shall, from the date of the commencement of the Asset and Business Transfer Agreement between the Kenya Ports Authority and Kenya Ferry Services Limited dated the 16th June, 2021, be deemed to have been transferred and vested in the Kenya Ports Authority with effect from the 
commencement date
.
4. Presumption of transfer
The assets, liabilities, obligations, property, rights, securities and undertakings set out in the Schedule, and any other assets, liabilities, obligations, property, rights, securities and undertakings of the Kenya Ferry Services Limited that are found to have belonged to the Kenya Ferry Services Limited on the day before the vesting date shall be deemed to have been transferred to the Kenya Ports Authority.
5. Legal and alternative dispute resolutions proceedings
All existing legal or alternative dispute resolution proceedings, or application to any authority by or against the Kenya Ferry Services Limited, shall not abate, be discontinued or in any way be prejudiced by reason only of the provisions of this Order, but the same may be prosecuted or continued by or against the Kenya Ports Authority, and any judgment or award obtained by or against the Kenya Ferry Services Limited before the 
commencement date
 shall thereafter be enforceable by or against the Kenya Ports Authority.
6. Documents, goods and other properties
The custody of any documents, goods or other property held by the Kenya Ferry Services Limited as bailee for any other person shall be transferred to the Kenya Ports Authority from the vesting date, and the rights and obligations of the Kenya Ferry Services under any contract of bailment shall be transferred or deemed to be transferred to the Kenya Ports Authority.
7. Contracts, agreements, conveyances, deeds, leases, licences, permits, exemptions, powers of attorney, undertakings, securities and other instruments
Any past or existing contracts, agreements, conveyances, deeds, leases, licences, permits, exemptions, powers of attorney, undertakings, securities and other instruments arising from or related to past or existing projects and consultancies entered into by, made with or granted or addressed to the Kenya Ferry Services Limited, whether alone or with any other person, and whether as principal or agent, shall, as from the 
commencement date
, be binding and have full force and effect in every respect against or in favour of the Kenya Ports Authority as if the Kenya Ports Authority had been party thereto, bound thereby or entitled to the benefit therefor, and as if any reference, express or implied, to any member, officer or employee of the Kenya Ports Authority in respect of anything to be done on or after the 
commencement date
 were substituted a reference to the member, officer or employee of the Kenya Ports Authority who most nearly corresponds thereto.
8. References to 
entity
 to mean references to Kenya Ports Authority
Any reference to an 
entity
 in any agreement or instrument entered into by the Kenya Ferry Services Limited in trust on behalf of or for the benefit of the Government of Kenya or the Cabinet Secretary, in relation to the assets specified in the Schedule, shall be deemed to be references to the Kenya Ports Authority.
9. Staff
Any person employed by the Kenya Ferry Services Limited on or before the vesting date shall be deemed to be an employee of the Kenya Ports Authority.
10. Savings and transition
Nothing in this Order shall terminate, discharge or prejudicially affect the assets, liabilities, obligations, property, rights, securities and undertakings of the Kenya Ferry Services Limited solely on account of the transfer or vesting under this Order.
SCHEDULE
















▲ To the top













  History of this document












            28 April 2023
            
              
this version










Published in Kenya Gazette 99

















            31 March 2023
            
            
          







              
                Commenced
                
              
              
            



































          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel