The Advocates (Marketing and Advertising) Rules
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in


























The Advocates (Marketing and Advertising) Rules


Legal Notice 42 of 2014





























































          Download PDF
          (195.4 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















The Advocates (Marketing and Advertising) Rules





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              









                  History
                























                            Citation
                          



                            Legal Notice 42 of 2014
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Primary work
    




Advocates Act





                            Date
                          



                            2 May 2014
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



      Type
    



      Legal Notice
    



      Original enactment
    




Download original enactment (PDF)

      (1.0 MB)
    




















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        




























































LAWS OF KENYA




ADVOCATES ACT


THE ADVOCATES (MARKETING AND ADVERTISING) RULES


LEGAL NOTICE 42 OF 2014





      
        
          
            Published in Kenya Gazette Vol. CXVI—No. 56 on 2 May 2014
          
        
      
    



          Commenced on 2 May 2014
          
        






1. Short title
These Rules may be cited as the Advocates (Marketing and Advertising) Rules, 2014.
2. General conduct
An advocate shall not—
(a)
unfairly apply for or unfairly seek instructions for professional business; or
(b)
do or permit to be done in the advocate’s name anything that may reasonably be considered as calculated to unfairly attract professional business.
3. Advertising
An advocate shall not advertise the advocate’s practice other than in accordance with these Rules.
4. Manner of advertising
An advertisement made under these Rules shall—
(a)
be objective, true and dignified;
(b)
be respectful of the professional ethics of the profession; and
(c)
not attempt to denigrate another advocate or the profession.
5. What may be contained in an advertisement
(1)
An advocate may only provide the following information in an advertisement under these Rules—
(a)
the identity of the advocate;
(b)
the identity of the advocate’s firm;
(c)
the date on which the advocate was admitted to the Roll of Advocates;
(d)
the address and other contact information of the advocate or the advocate’s firm;
(e)
the hours of business of the advocate or the advocate’s firm;
(f)
the language of business used by the advocate or the advocate’s firm;
(g)
the academic or professional qualifications of the advocate; or
(h)
any contribution that the advocate or the advocate’s firm may have made to the preparation of a published legal article or a legislative Bill, or any contribution made by the advocate or the advocate’s firm to legal education.
(2)
An advocate shall not provide the following information in an advertisement under these Rules—
(a)
the name or the identity of a client of the advocate or the advocate’s firm;
(b)
a picture of the advocate, the advocate’s partner or partners, or another advocate employed in the advocate’s firm;
(c)
academic or professional positions held by the advocate before that advocate’s admission to the Roll of Advocates; or
(d)
a promise by the advocate or the advocate’s firm to achieve a particular outcome for clients or prospective clients of the advocate or the advocate’s firm or that failure to obtain that outcome shall constitute a waiver of the advocate’s or the advocate’s firm’s legal fees.
6. Register of specialists
(1)
The Council may maintain a register of advocates who are specialists in any branch of law and such a register may classify advocates into each branch or specialty.
(2)
If an advocate is recorded in the register under sub-paragraph (1), that advocate may state that fact in an advertisement made under these Rules.
7. Forms of advertisement
(1)
An advocate may advertise under these Rules in the following forms—
(a)
in a non-legal or non-professional directory;
(b)
in a legal or professional directory;
(c)
in a website or other digital platform on the internet;
(d)
in the print media including in a newspaper, magazine, booklet, periodical or journal:
Provided that the advocate shall only advertise in a print medium up to four times in any given year and the advertisement shall measure not more than 0.210m x 0.297m; or
(e)
in the form of a plate or a plaque at the entrance to the advocate’s or advocate’s firm’s ordinary place of business and the plate or plaque shall measure not more than 0.5m x 0.35m.
(2)
An advocate shall not advertise under these Rules on radio, television or in the form of an illuminated billboard or placard.
8. Conferences, seminars, public activities, etc
An advocate who attends a conference, seminar or similar public activity may publish a paper, a circular, an article or a similar document but only by identifying that advocate by name and profession.
9. Council to rule on conduct of advocate
Where a person accuses an advocate or an advocate’s law firm of professional misconduct under these Rules, the Council shall hear both the complainant and the advocate or the advocate’s firm expeditiously and determine whether that advocate or advocate’s firm has committed an act of professional misconduct under these Rules.
10. Professional misconduct
An advocate commits an act of professional misconduct under these Rules if—
(a)
that advocate or that advocate’s firm fails to comply with these Rules;
(b)
that advocate uses an appearance at a conference, seminar or similar public activity for advertisement;
(c)
that advocate or that advocate’s firm uses an intermediary to solicit professional business; or
(d)
that advocate or that advocate’s firm makes false or misleading statements regarding information that should be provided under these Rules to solicit professional business
















▲ To the top













  History of this document












            02 May 2014
            
              
this version










Published in Kenya Gazette 56





              
                Commenced
                
              
              
            



































          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel