The Capital Markets (Nairobi Securities Exchange Limited Shareholding) Regulations
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in


























The Capital Markets (Nairobi Securities Exchange Limited Shareholding) Regulations


Legal Notice 74 of 2016










































 This is the latest version of this Legal Notice.
      























          Download PDF
          (185.4 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















The Capital Markets (Nairobi Securities Exchange Limited Shareholding) Regulations





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              









                  History
                









                  Related documents
                  
1

























                            Citation
                          



                            Legal Notice 74 of 2016
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Primary work
    




Capital Markets Act





                            Date
                          



                            31 December 2022
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



      Type
    



      Legal Notice
    



      Original enactment
    




Download original enactment (PDF)

      (79.5 KB)
    











                          Related documents
                        





                                    
                                    Is amended by
                                    
24th Annual Supplement






















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        




























































LAWS OF KENYA




CAPITAL MARKETS ACT


THE CAPITAL MARKETS (NAIROBI SECURITIES EXCHANGE LIMITED SHAREHOLDING) REGULATIONS


LEGAL NOTICE 74 OF 2016





      
        
          
            Published in Kenya Gazette Vol. CXVIII—No. 52 on 13 May 2016
          
        
      
    



          Commenced on 13 May 2016
          
        







    
      
      
        
          [Revised by 
24th Annual Supplement (Legal Notice 221 of 2023)
 on 
31 December 2022
]
        
      
    
  






1. Citation
These Regulations may be cited as the Capital Markets (Nairobi Securities Exchange Limited Shareholding) Regulations.
2. Interpretation
In these Regulations unless the context otherwise requires—
"acting in concert" means persons who pursuant to a formal or informal agreement or understanding actively co-operate through the acquisition by any of them of shares in a public listed company to obtain or consolidate control of that company;
"Exchange" means the Nairobi Securities Exchange Limited;
"private company" has the meaning assigned to it under the Companies Act (Cap. 486);
"public company" has the meaning assigned to it under the Companies Act (Cap. 486); and
"trading participant" means a licensed person with rights to trade at the Exchange.
3. Restriction on Shareholding
(1)
An individual or private company shall not, at any time,  directly or indirectly, either individually or together with persons acting in concert hold more than five percent of the equity share capital of the Exchange.
(2)
A public company shall not, at any time, directly or indirectly, either individually or with persons acting in concert, hold more than ten percent of the equity share capital of the Exchange.
(3)
The trading participants shall not, at any time, directly or indirectly, cumulatively hold more than forty percent of the total equity shareholding of the Exchange.
4. Approval to exceed limit
(1)
A person may apply to the Authority to waive the ownership restrictions under Regulation 3(1) or 3(2).
(2)
The Authority may grant the waiver if—
(a)
it is satisfied that such waiver is in the interest of the public or of the Exchange; and
(b)
it certifies the applicant to be fit and proper.
(3)
A person granted waiver under sub-regulation (2) shall file a declaration within fifteen days of the end of every financial year to the Authority and the Exchange that he has complied with the fit and proper criteria provided in the Act.
(4)
A person who—
(a)
holds five per cent or more of the equity shares of the Exchange; and
(b)
the Authority has determined that that person does not fulfill the fit and proper criteria as set out under the Act, shall—
(i)
cease to exercise all his voting rights immediately upon the Exchange being notified by the Authority, in writing, that the shareholder does not fulfill the fit and proper criteria as set under the Act; and
(ii)
reduce the holding of equity shares to less than five per cent of the share capital of the Exchange within twelve months, or such longer period as the Authority may determine.
5. Exemption
The provisions of Regulation 17 and 18 of the Capital Markets (Derivatives Markets) Regulations (sub. leg) shall not apply to the Exchange.
6. Transitional provisions
Any person holding equity shares in the Exchange in excess of the limits specified in these Regulations at the commencement of these Regulations shall reduce his shareholding within six months to ensure compliance with these Regulations or apply for exemption in accordance with Regulation 4.
















▲ To the top













  History of this document












            31 December 2022
            
              
this version









              
                Revised by
                
24th Annual Supplement

















            13 May 2016
            
            
          








Published in Kenya Gazette 52





              
                Commenced
                
              
              
            





















  Related documents







Is amended by






24th Annual Supplement



































          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel