The Births and Deaths Registration (Births and Deaths Occurring Outside Kenya) (Forms and Fees) Rules
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in


























The Births and Deaths Registration (Births and Deaths Occurring Outside Kenya) (Forms and Fees) Rules


Legal Notice 170 of 1969










































 This is the latest version of this Legal Notice.
      























          Download PDF
          (551.8 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















The Births and Deaths Registration (Births and Deaths Occurring Outside Kenya) (Forms and Fees) Rules





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              









                  History
                









                  Related documents
                  
1

























                            Citation
                          



                            Legal Notice 170 of 1969
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Primary work
    




Births and Deaths Registration Act





                            Date
                          







                                31 December 2022
                              






31 December 2022






18 July 1969











                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



      Type
    



      Legal Notice
    











                          Related documents
                        





                                    
                                    Is amended by
                                    
24th Annual Supplement






















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        




























































LAWS OF KENYA




BIRTHS AND DEATHS REGISTRATION ACT


THE BIRTHS AND DEATHS REGISTRATION (BIRTHS AND DEATHS OCCURRING OUTSIDE KENYA) (FORMS AND FEES) RULES


LEGAL NOTICE 170 OF 1969





      
        
          
            Published in Kenya Gazette Vol. LXXI—No. 30 on 18 July 1969
          
        
      
    



          Commenced on 18 July 1969
          
        







    
      
      
        
          [Revised by 
24th Annual Supplement (Legal Notice 221 of 2023)
 on 
31 December 2022
]
        
      
    
  






1.
These Rules may be cited as the Births and Deaths Registration (Births and Deaths Occurring Outside Kenya) (Forms and Fees) Rules.
2.
In these Rules, except where the context otherwise requires—
“registrar” means registrar of births and deaths occurring outside Kenya.
3.
The register of births occurring outside Kenya and the register of deaths occurring outside Kenya, required to be kept under subsection 2 of section 7 of the Act by the Registrar shall contain the particulars set out in Forms I and II respectively in the First Schedule to these Rules.
4.
A certificate of birth issued by the Registrar-General on payment of the appropriate fee specified in the Second Schedule to these Rules shall be in Form III in the First Schedule to these Rules.
5.
A certificate of death issued by the Registrar-General on payment of the appropriate fee specified in the Second Schedule to these Rules shall be in Form IV in the First Schedule to these Rules.
6.
Applications for the registration of a birth or death of a citizen of Kenya occurring outside Kenya shall be made to the registrar in Forms V and VI respectively in the First Schedule to these Rules and the duly completed form shall be submitted to the registrar by the informant either in person or by post.
7.
The fees specified in the Second Schedule to these Rules shall be payable for the matters set out therein.
FIRST SCHEDULE
FORMS
Signature ............................
Designation and Address ...............
...............................
...............................
Before completing this form please read the notes on the other side.
NOTES TO PERSON COMPLETING 
A birth can be registered only if the following conditions are met—
1.
Application for Registration of the Birth outside Kenya of a child who is a citizen of Kenya can be made by and person having knowledge of the birth.
2.
Documentary evidence should be produced in proof of the birth. A note of the kind of documentary evidence needed is given below.
3.
This form should be signed by the applicant and, where there is a Kenya Mission in the country abroad, countersigned by a member of that mission.
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE (
see 2 above)
The documentary evidence to be produced of the birth may be a certificate of birth issued by the appropriate authority in the country abroad, with an English translation of the certificate if it is not in English; or if certificates are not issued in the country abroad, a certificate of the birth given by the Doctor, Midwife or other person who attended the birth.
Where a person is unable to produce satisfactory documentary evidence the application may still be completed and forwarded to the Registrar who will advise what alternative evidence may be accepted.
When completed this application should be sent
 
THE REGISTRAR-GENERAL
P.O. BOX 30031,
NAIROBI,
KENYA,
FOR OFFICIAL USE
 
B.
—By member of Kenya Mission abroad
I am satisfied from evidence produced to me and inquiries which I have made that the above information is correct to the best of my knowledge.
Before completing this form please read the notes on the other side.
Signature: ..........
Designation and Address ........
....................
Before completing this form please read the notes on the other side.
 
 
NOTES TO PERSON COMPLETING FORM
A Death can be registered only if the following conditions are met:—
1.
Application for Registration of a Death of a citizen of Kenya occurring abroad can be made by any person having knowledge of the death.
2.
Documentary evidence should be produced in proof of the death. A note of the kind of documentary evidence needed is given below.
3.
This form should be signed by the applicant and, where there is a Kenya Mission in the country abroad, countersigned by a member of that mission.
DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE 
(see 2 above)
The documentary evidence to be produced in proof of the death may be a certificate of death issued by the appropriate authority in the country abroad, with an English translation of the certificate if it is not in English; or if certificates are not issued in the country abroad, a certificate of the death given by the medical attendant or other person who attended the death.
Where a person is unable to produce satisfactory documentary evidence the application may still be completed and forwarded to the Registrar who will advise what alternative evidence may be accepted.
When completed this application should be sent to:—
 
THE REGISTRAR-GENERAL
P.O. BOX 30031,
NAIROBI,
KENYA,
FOR OFFICIAL USE
 
SECOND SCHEDULE 
[r. 7]
FEES
 
Sh. cts
(a)
For a certified copy of any entry in any register of birth or death in the custody of the Registrar-General
10 00
(b)
For making a correction in any register or index
5 00
















▲ To the top













  History of this document












            31 December 2022
            
              
this version









              
                Revised by
                
24th Annual Supplement

















            18 July 1969
            
            
          







              
                
                  Published in Kenya Gazette 30
                
              
              
            



              
                Commenced
                
              
              
            


Read this version





















  Related documents







Is amended by






24th Annual Supplement



































          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel