The Animal Diseases (Hatcheries) Rules
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in


























The Animal Diseases (Hatcheries) Rules


Legal Notice 47 of 1985










































 This is the latest version of this Legal Notice.
      























          Download PDF
          (224.3 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















The Animal Diseases (Hatcheries) Rules





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              









                  History
                









                  Related documents
                  
1

























                            Citation
                          



                            Legal Notice 47 of 1985
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Primary work
    




Animal Diseases Act





                            Date
                          



                            31 December 2022
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



      Type
    



      Legal Notice
    



      Original enactment
    




Download original enactment (PDF)

      (3.5 MB)
    











                          Related documents
                        





                                    
                                    Is amended by
                                    
24th Annual Supplement






















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        




























































LAWS OF KENYA




ANIMAL DISEASES ACT


THE ANIMAL DISEASES (HATCHERIES) RULES


LEGAL NOTICE 47 OF 1985





      
        
          
            Published in Kenya Gazette Vol. LXXXVII—No. 9 on 1 March 1985
          
        
      
    



          Commenced on 1 March 1985
          
        







    
      
      
        
          [Revised by 
24th Annual Supplement (Legal Notice 221 of 2023)
 on 
31 December 2022
]
        
      
    
  






1. Citation
These Rules may be cited as the Animal Diseases (Hatcheries) Rules.
2. Interpretation
In these Rules, unless the context otherwise requires—
"avian tuberculosis" means the poultry disease caused by Mycobacterium avian;
"baby chicks" includes all newly hatched poultry which are less than three days old;
"epidemic tremor" means the poultry disease caused by avian encephalomyelitis virus;
"flock" means a collection of poultry of the same breed, cross or variety, capable of interbreeding;
"fowl pest" means the poultry disease caused by Newcastle disease virus;
"fowl typhoid" means the poultry disease caused by Salmonella gallinarum;
"hatchery" includes any equipment operated or controlled for the production of baby chicks;
"inspecting officer" means an inspector or a veterinary officer;
"poultry" includes chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, guinea fowls, pigeons, quails, pea fowl, pheasants, parrots, ostrich, game birds, and other domestic fowl which are bred for the primary purpose of production of eggs and meat;
"pullorum disease" means the disease of poultry caused by Salmonella pullorum.
3. Hatcheries to be licensed
A person shall not operate a hatchery for the sale of baby chicks to farmers without a licence.
4. Application for a licence
(1)
A person who intends to operate a hatchery for the production of baby chicks for sale to farmers shall apply for a licence to the nearest inspecting officer in the approved form.
(2)
An inspecting officer, on receipt of an application, shall inspect the premises intended to be used as a hatchery and shall forward a report thereon to the Director.
(3)
On receipt of the report of the inspecting officer, the Director may issue a licence in the form set out in the Schedule to the applicant on payment of a fee.
(4)
Where an inspecting officer believes that the applicant should not be granted a licence, he shall first inform the applicant in writing of the reasons thereof and the inspecting officer shall allow the applicant two months from the date of receipt thereof to remedy any defects in the premises or equipment before he forwards a report to the Director.
5. Hatchery licence
(1)
A hatchery licence shall expire on the 30th June in each year, but may be renewed.
(2)
The fees for a licence for the first year or part of a year and for each annual renewal shall be one hundred shillings.
(3)
An application for renewal shall be made to the Director in the approved form before the 30th April in each year accompanied by the renewal fee.
6. Hatchery premises and equipment to be sanitary and fit for the purpose
(1)
A hatchery shall be situated away from residential and commercial premises and shall be constructed to prevent the escape of the flock and the entry of unauthorized personnel.
(2)
The equipment, poultry houses, brooder rooms and incubators at the premises of a hatchery, and the land shall be kept in a clean sanitary condition.
7. Maintenance and cleaning of brooder rooms and incubators
(1)
The walls, floors and trays of incubators shall be kept clean and sanitary, free from broken eggs, eggshells and droppings.
(2)
Hatching trays shall be cleaned, disinfected and fumigated after each batch.
8. Breeding flock, 
etc.
(1)
A breeding flock shall consist of healthy, normal individuals and shall be characteristic of the breed, variety, cross or other combination which it is stated to represent.
(2)
The breeding flock, eggs and equipment connected therewith shall be kept separate from any other flock and other animals.
(3)
The breeding flock shall, so far as it is possible so to do, be kept vaccinated against notifiable diseases to which it is liable; and the breeding flock between eighteen and twenty- two weeks old shall be tested by an inspecting officer for pullorum disease and fowl typhoid.
(4)
Incubated eggs shall be sound in shell, typical for their breed, variety, strain or cross and reasonably uniform in shape and hatching eggs shall be placed in tray.
(5)
Baby chicks shall be boxed in new boxes.
(6)
A licensee shall immediately report in writing to an inspecting officer all cases of sickness, unusual mortality or significant drop in egg production.
9. Hatchery personnel
The licensee shall ensure that all personnel who come into contact with the breeding flock and the hatchery shall take sanitary precautions, including the disinfection of footwear and change of clothing, to prevent the transmission of infection.
10. Inspection
An inspecting officer shall inspect the breeding flock, the equipment and premises of a hatchery regularly, and the inspection shall be carried out not less than six times in a year.
11. Breeding and sale from infected hatchery
(1)
A person shall not, for the purpose of sale, breed poultry unless the breeding flock has passed a blood test for pullorum disease.
(2)
A person shall not sell, expose or offer for sale any poultry, baby chicks or eggs from a hatchery which is infected with a notifiable disease affecting poultry.
12. Licensee to keep records
A licensee shall keep written records of—
(a)
movements of hatching eggs, baby chicks and birds to and from the hatchery;
(b)
names and addresses of consignors and consignees;
(c)
the fertility, hatching rate and culls for each hatch of eggs set; and
(d)
treatment, tests and results of post-mortems carried out.
13. Power of inspecting officer
An inspecting officer may, with the written authority of the Director, cause poultry, baby chicks or eggs, which he suspects to be infected with a notifiable disease affecting poultry, to be destroyed and the hatchery from which they come to be cleaned, disinfected and fumigated.
14. Offences and penalty
A person who contravenes a provision of these Rules shall be guilty of an offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to a fine not exceeding five thousand shillings, or to both.
SCHEDULE 
[r. 4(3)]
LICENCE TO OPERATE A HATCHERY
Name ...........................................................
Address ......................................................
Premises L.R. No. ........................................
You are licensed to operate a hatchery at the above mentioned premises from ................., 20 .......... to 30th June, 20 .........
Application for renewal shall be made to the Director not later than 30th April, 20 .............
Dated the ................., 20 .............
 
 
.................................................
 
 
Director of Veterinary Services.
















▲ To the top













  History of this document












            31 December 2022
            
              
this version









              
                Revised by
                
24th Annual Supplement

















            01 March 1985
            
            
          








Published in Kenya Gazette 9





              
                Commenced
                
              
              
            





















  Related documents







Is amended by






24th Annual Supplement



































          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel