The Anti-Bribery Act (Guidelines to Assist Public and Private Entities in the Preparation of Procedures for the Prevention of Bribery and Corruption, 2022
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in


























The Anti-Bribery Act (Guidelines to Assist Public and Private Entities in the Preparation of Procedures for the Prevention of Bribery and Corruption, 2022


Gazette Notice 6022 of 2022





























































          Download PDF
          (188.0 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















The Anti-Bribery Act (Guidelines to Assist Public and Private Entities in the Preparation of Procedures for the Prevention of Bribery and Corruption, 2022





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              









                  History
                























                            Citation
                          



                            Gazette Notice 6022 of 2022
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Primary work
    




Anti-Bribery Act





                            Date
                          



                            27 May 2022
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



      Type
    



      Gazette Notice
    



      Original enactment
    




Download original enactment (PDF)

      (83.0 KB)
    




















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        




























































LAWS OF KENYA




ANTI-BRIBERY ACT


THE ANTI-BRIBERY ACT (GUIDELINES TO ASSIST PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ENTITIES IN THE PREPARATION OF PROCEDURES FOR THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION, 2022


GAZETTE NOTICE 6022 OF 2022





      
        
          
            Published in Kenya Gazette Vol. CXXIV—No. 96 on 27 May 2022
          
        
      
    



            Assented to on 27 May 2022
          



          Commenced on 27 May 2022
          
        






 
SCHEDULE
GUIDELINES TO ASSIST PUBLIC AND PRIVATE ENTITIES IN THE PREPARATION OF PROCEDURES FOR THE PREVENTION OF BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION
Part I — PRELIMINARY
1. Legal Framework
(1)
The Anti-Bribery Act (Cap. 79B), requires public and private entities to establish procedures for the prevention of bribery and corruption. An entity that fails to establish bribery and corruption prevention procedures commits an offence.
(2)
The Commission is required under the Act to assist public and private entities to develop and implement the procedures for the  prevention of bribery and corruption.
(3)
The Cabinet Secretary, in consultation with the Commission, is required to publish guidelines to assist private and public entities in preparation of procedures required under the Act.
(4)
Each State officer, public officer or person holding a position of authority in a private entity shall report knowledge or suspicion of an act of bribery or corruption within twenty-four hours thereof.
(5)
A person who fails to report knowledge or suspicion acts of bribery or corruption within the specified period commits an offence.
(6)
The Act provides for the protection of whistle-blowers, informants and witnesses from intimidation or harassment for providing information on bribery or corruption or giving evidence in court.
(7)
Any person who demotes, admonishes, dismisses from employment, transfers to unfavourable working areas or otherwise harasses and intimidates a whistle-blower, informant or witness will commits an offence and is liable, upon conviction, to a fine not exceeding one million shillings or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or to both.
2. Purposes of these Guidelines
(1)
The purpose of these Guidelines is to assist public and private entities or any other person to prepare procedures for the prevention of bribery and corruption.
(2)
These Guidelines should be read together with the bribery Act, 2016 and Regulations made thereunder.
3. Entities Shall Establish bribery and Corruption Prevention Procedures
(1)
Under section 9 (1) of the Anti-Bribery Act (Cap. 79B), all public and private entities shall establish procedures for the prevention of bribery and corruption taking into account the size, scale and nature of operations of the entity.
(2)
Under section 12 (1) of the Act, the Cabinet Secretary shall, in consultation with the Commission, publish guidelines to assist public and private entities in the establishment of bribery and corruption prevention procedures.
4. Liability for Failure to Put in Place Procedures
(1)
Under section 9 (2) of the Act, a private entity commits an offence when it fails to establish bribery and corruption prevention procedures.
(2)
Under section 19 of the Act, an entity or its directors, senior officer or other responsible person shall be liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding one million shillings or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, or to both, for committing an offence under section 9 (2).
Part II - GUIDING PRINCIPLES ON PROCEDURES FOR PREVENTION OF BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION
5. Procedures to be in Writing and Official Languages
(1)
Bribery and corruption prevention procedures developed by entities in compliance with the Act shall be in writing. The procedures shall be in the official languages.
(2)
An entity may translate the bribery and corruption prevention procedures into any other language as may be appropriate in the circumstances.
6. Bribery and Corruption Risk Assessment and Management
During the development of the bribery and corruption prevention procedures, the entity shall assess and map out bribery and corruption risks in its operations and develop a plan to mitigate the risks.
7. Implementation Structure or Arrangement
(1)
The bribery and corruption prevention procedures shall provide for an implementation structure or arrangement, which shall take into account the size, scale and nature of operations of the entity and the identified risks.
(2)
The implementation structure or arrangement shall —
(a)
ensure that there is commitment from the entity's leadership;
(b)
ensure involvement of all employees in the entity;
(c)
where appropriate, incorporate members from external stakeholders of the entity;
(d)
designate a senior officer or person acting in such capacity to  oversee the implementation of the procedures in the entity; and
(e)
ensure that necessary resources for implementation are provided;
8. Reporting Mechanisms
(1)
The bribery and corruption prevention procedures shall provide for sufficient mechanisms to facilitate efficient and effective reporting of bribery and corruption within the entity and the Commissions.
(2)
The reporting mechanisms shall facilitate —
(a)
timely reporting;
(b)
access to reporting channels;
(c)
confidentiality;
(d)
prompt action;
(e)
protection of whistle-blowers, informants and witnesses; and
(f)
feedback.
9. Reports
The bribery and corruption prevention procedures shall provide for receiving, recording, processing and disseminating reports for appropriate action and feedback and take into account fair administrative action.
10. Protection of Whistle-Blowers, informants and Witnesses
The bribery and corruption prevention procedures shall provide effective measures for the protection of whistle-blowers, informants and witnesses including —
(a)
maintaining the confidentiality of the identity of whistle-blowers, informants and witnesses, details of the bribery or corruption report, and the sources of information relating to the bribery or corruption report;
(b)
establishing reporting channels for whistle-blowers, informants and witnesses who have suffered or reporting acts of bribery or corruption within the entity;
(c)
taking appropriate action on reports of retribution, victimisation or intimidation of informants, witnesses and whistle-blowers; and
(d)
instituting protection measures for whistle-blowers, informants and witnesses within the entity.
11. Communication and Training
The bribery and corruption prevention procedures shall provide for effective communication, training, awareness-creation and dissemination to internal and external stakeholders on the bribery and corruption prevention procedures established by the entity.
12. Enforcement Structure
(1)
The bribery and corruption prevention procedures shall designate a person or persons in authority to set up an enforcement structure.
(2)
The enforcement structure shall take into account the scale, size and nature of the operations of the entity and provide for appropriate action for violation of the law, regulations and bribery and corruption prevention procedures within the entity.
13. Monitoring, Evaluation and Review
The bribery and corruption prevention procedures shall include appropriate measures for monitoring, evaluation and review of the effectiveness of the procedures, identification of emerging risks and making improvements where necessary.
14. Collaboration and Co-operation with other Agencies
The bribery and corruption prevention procedures may provide for collaboration and co-operation with other agencies within the  sector or industry. Collaboration or co-operation may be undertaken through —
(a)
joint planning;
(b)
sharing of information and best practice;
(c)
mutual consultation;
(d)
peer review; and
(e)
capacity building.
Part III—ASSISTANCE BY THE COMMISSION
15. Advice to Entities
The Commission may, on an entity's request, advise the entity on the development and implementation of bribery and corruption prevention procedures.
16 Advisories
The Commission may provide advisories generally on the development of bribery and corruption prevention procedures.
















▲ To the top













  History of this document












            27 May 2022
            
              
this version









              
                Assented to
                
              
              
            




Published in Kenya Gazette 96





              
                Commenced
                
              
              
            



































          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel