The Guidelines on the Approval and Registration of Credit Rating Agencies
    - Kenya Law


























































Skip to document content


Go to main menu


Go to search












About Us






Judicial Profiles






Product Catalogue






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map
































Search












































Search














Home







                Case Law
              






Superior Courts






Subordinate Courts






Small Claims Court






Civil and Human Rights Tribunals






Commercial Tribunals






Environment and Land Tribunals






Intellectual Property Tribunals






Regional and International Courts






Tribunals






Elections











                Laws of Kenya
              






The Constitution of Kenya






Laws of Kenya






Treaties







                    EAC Legislation
                  










Counties






Cause List







                Kenya Gazette
              







                Publications
              







                        Bench Bulletin
                      







                        Case Digests
                      







                        Commission Reports
                      







                        Journals
                      







                        Law Related Articles
                      







                        Weekly Newsletter
                      











                Parliament
              







                    Committee Reports
                  







                    Bills
                  










Blog










Log in


























The Guidelines on the Approval and Registration of Credit Rating Agencies


Gazette Notice 8512 of 2001










































 This is the latest version of this Gazette Notice.
      























          Download PDF
          (207.7 KB)
        








Report


Report a problem




















The Guidelines on the Approval and Registration of Credit Rating Agencies





  
    Copy citation
  


















                Document detail
              









                  History
                









                  Related documents
                  
1

























                            Citation
                          



                            Gazette Notice 8512 of 2001
                            


  
    Copy
  






      Primary work
    




Capital Markets Act





                            Date
                          



                            31 December 2022
                          



                          Language
                          
                        



                            English
                          



      Type
    



      Gazette Notice
    



      Original enactment
    




Download original enactment (PDF)

      (4.3 MB)
    











                          Related documents
                        





                                    
                                    Is amended by
                                    
24th Annual Supplement






















Skip to document content













            Table of contents
          



          Search
        




























































LAWS OF KENYA




CAPITAL MARKETS ACT


THE GUIDELINES ON THE APPROVAL AND REGISTRATION OF CREDIT RATING AGENCIES


GAZETTE NOTICE 8512 OF 2001





      
        
          
            Published in Kenya Gazette Vol. CIII—No. 82 on 21 December 2001
          
        
      
    



          Commenced on 21 December 2001
          
        







    
      
      
        
          [Revised by 
24th Annual Supplement (Legal Notice 221 of 2023)
 on 
31 December 2022
]
        
      
    
  






1.
Introduction
The Capital Markets Authority is seeking to promote the establishment of credit rating agencies as part of measures aimed at building an active corporate securities debt market and impetus to deepening of the domestic capital markets.
These are guidelines on the requirements for approval and registration of credit rating agencies in Kenya.
1.1
Credit Rating:
Credit rating is an objective and independent opinion on the general creditworthiness of an issuer of a debt instrument, and its ability to meet its obligations in a timely manner over the life of the financial instrument based on relevant risk factors including the ability of the issuer to generate cash in the future. Ratings rank the debt issue within a consistent framework to compare risk among the different debt instruments in the market and assign a risk grade.
As it pertains to assessment of future likely positions on the basis of both quantitative and qualitative judgment and past performance, credit rating is necessarily subjective. The goal of the rating process is to arrive at a reasoned judgment on credit risk not through a set formula but rather through a careful review and analysis of the critical issues surrounding a specific debt and the issuer. This in particular includes the ability of the management to sustain in future, cash generation in the face of adverse changes in the business and economic environment. A rating is therefore an informed opinion of future outcome based on known qualitative and quantitative factors.
A rating does not constitute a recommendation to purchase, sell or hold a particular security. In addition, a rating does not comment on the suitability of an investment for a particular investor.
The objective of a credit rating is to provide independent, high quality, impartial, value-added quantitative and qualitative review as well as analytical information on the risk profile assessment of issuers of financial instruments.
It therefore serves to promote confidence in the capital markets and enhance transparency by facilitating investors’ awareness on underlying risks of an issuer or issued financial instrument through assignment of ratings.
2.
Core Professional Capacity
2.1
The applicant must make evident its capacity to perform the role of a rating agency.
2.2
The applicant must have a background and experience as well as professional expertise to provide the service of a rating agency.
2.3
The applicant must either be in the process of appointing or have appointed professionals including economic, financial and research analysts, and other relevant quantitative and qualitative analysts who have the relevant background in the rating business.
3.
Objectivity and Independence
3.1
The applicant must demonstrate its independence and objectivity.
3.2
The applicant must not be associated directly or indirectly with group(s) who have conflicting interests in the area of the rating business.
3.3
The applicant must also demonstrate that it has a proven rating methodology.
3.4
The rating process must have sufficient internal checks and balances to safeguard objectivity in particular where qualitative judgment also plays an important role in the rating process.
3.5
The rating process must be based on quantitative and qualitative review of facts and must not rely in hearsay or rumours to downgrade or upgrade a particular issuer or issued financial instrument.
4.
Ownership
4.1
In order to ensure independence and objectivity, the applicant must be a body corporate with a preponderance of an institutional shareholding of repute.
4.2
The shareholders, board of directors, management and professional analytical staff should be persons of impeccable character.
4.3
The applicant should partly be owned by an internationally recognized rating agency or have a contractual arrangement with an internationally recognized rating agency that provides technical and strategic support drawn from international experience.
4.4
For purposes of this guidelines, an internationally recognized agency shall be a rating agency which has been in the business of providing credit ratings for debt securities or any securities of interest to investors, which obligates the issuer to pay back the principal amount raised in more than two markets for at least five years.
4.5
The ownership structure or association and capital level shall not be the only basis or criteria of determining the independence and integrity of a rating agency.
5.
Capital Requirements
The applicant shall have a stable financial base with a minimum paid up capital of KSh. 12 million (or the equivalent in US dollars).
6.
Disclosure of Information by Rating Agency
The rating agency must disclose to the Authority, issuers and the general public the following—
(a)
General fee structure or any change thereof;
(b)
downgrades of ratings;
(c)
disclosure of ratings of commercial paper or corporate bonds as applicable.
7.
Confidentiality
The rating agency must have a system of maintaining on a confidential basis the information supplied strictly for the purpose of rating by issuers in order to safeguard and promote confidence in the rating process.
8.
Documents to Accompany the Application for Approval and Registration of a Credit Agency in Kenya
An application for approval and registration should be made to the Capital Markets Authority accompanied by the following—
(a)
certificate of Incorporation, Memorandum and Articles of Association;
(b)
business plan (to include resumes of the top management staff, management structure, brief on the rating methodology, rating grades, fee structure);
(c)
a sample of a standard agreement between the rating agency and its clients;
(d)
draft sample "letter of requests" for rating accompanied by a draft of the "information requirements for rating securities".
















▲ To the top













  History of this document












            31 December 2022
            
              
this version









              
                Revised by
                
24th Annual Supplement

















            21 December 2001
            
            
          








Published in Kenya Gazette 82





              
                Commenced
                
              
              
            





















  Related documents







Is amended by






24th Annual Supplement



































          
          Except for some material which is expressly stated to be under a specified 
Creative Commons

          license, the contents of this website are in the public domain and free from any copyright restrictions.
        
        






Home






About us






Our Partners






Careers






Contact Us






Site Map







          © 2025 National Council for Law Reporting (Kenya Law) is ISO 9001:2015 Certified. | 
Creative Commons
 · 
Privacy Policy and Disclaimer








Contact us








Visit our Facebook page












Visit our Twitter/X profile












Visit our YouTube channel